more product managers and teams are
getting laid off. The problem is the
message that Daniel E from Spotify sent
out with their layoffs in 2024. We still
have too many teams doing work around
the work.
>> Even if you were told to build a thing
that the execs are really excited about,
you're still going to get fired
eventually.
>> If you were the CEO of this company,
would you fully fund your own team?
Frankly, most of the people I ask that
question to don't know the answer right
away,
>> which is something called the low impact
PM death spiral. is the dynamic in which
every medium to large company I've ever
worked with finds itself in one way or
another. It starts with adding little
features here and there, making little
cosmetic improvements until the next
round of layoffs.
>> You have three steps to become more of
an impact first product team.
>> So, the first is in setting team goals,
no more than one step away from company
goals. Don't let it get cascaded into
oblivion.
>> You're an ICPM. It's up to you. No
excuses. You can follow all the best
practices, but if your company goes out
of business, they're not going to keep
writing your paycheck for 2 years
because all of your OKRs were a point 6
or a 7.
Today, my guest is Matt Lame. Matt is a
longtime product leader, author of one
of the most popular and practical books
in the field of product management
called Product Management in Practice.
And over the course of his consulting
practice, he's worked with hundreds of
product teams, helping them improve how
they operate and drive more impact more
consistently. From that experience, he
wrote and recently published a new book
called Impact First Product Teams that I
could not agree more with. In our
conversation, Matt shares why it is so
essential to align all of your work with
business critical outcomes, especially
if you fear layoffs at your company. We
talk about the low impact death spiral
that many product teams fall into. What
steps an individual product team can
take to align their work to business
critical outcomes regardless of how
their organization approaches product
development. Tips for how to push back
on stupid ideas that execs ask you to
build and so much more. The message in
this episode is one that I believe every
product manager needs to hear,
especially if you don't work at a
high-flying Silicon Valley tech company.
A huge thank you to Martin Ericson,
Adrienne Joelo, and Dan Corbin for
suggesting topics and questions for this
conversation. If you enjoy this podcast,
don't forget to subscribe and follow it
in your favorite podcasting app or
YouTube. Also, if you become an annual
subscriber of my newsletter, you get a
year free of a bunch of incredible
products including Replet, Lovable,
Bolt, N8N, Linear, Superhum, Dcript,
Whisper Flow, Gamma, Perplexity, Warp,
Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, JPRD,
Mobin, and more. Check it out at
lennisnewsletter.com and click bundle.
With that, I bring you Matt Lame. This
episode is brought to you by Interpret.
Interpret is a customer intelligence
platform used by leading CX and product
orgs like Canva, Notion, Perplexity,
Straa, Hinge, and Linear to leverage the
voice of the customer and build
best-in-class products. Interpret
unifies all customer conversations in
real time from gong recordings to zenesk
tickets to Twitter threads and makes it
available for your team for analysis and
for action. What makes interpret unique
is its ability to build and update a
customerspecific knowledge graph that
provides the most granular and accurate
categorization of all customer feedback
and connects that customer feedback to
critical metrics like revenue and
seesat. If modernizing your voice of
customer program to a generational
upgrade is a 2025 priority like
customer- ccentric industry leaders like
Canva, Notion, Perplexity, and Linear,
reach out to the team at
interpret.com/lenny.
That's nerp p.com/lenny.
This episode is brought to you by
Pragmatic Institute, a trusted leader in
product training and the go-to source
for teams driving real results. This
fall, they're back with the biggest
event of the year, the future of product
management summit. On October 16th, join
thousands of product managers,
marketers, and leaders for a free
virtual experience built to tackle
today's toughest challenges and explore
the future of product. You'll hear from
trusted voices like Terresa Torres and
Matt Lame along with Pragmatics expert
instructors and other innovators who are
transforming how teams tackle AI,
prioritization, and product strategy.
Whether you're building products,
leading teams, or leveling up your
career, this summit delivers practical
insights designed to move your team
forward. Registration is open, but spots
are limited. Save your seat at
pragmaticinstitute.com/lenny.
That's pragmaticinstitute.com/lenny.
Matt, thank you so much for being here
and welcome to the podcast.
>> Thank you so much for having me. I'm
really, really excited to be here.
>> I'm even more excited. You have a really
interesting background. I usually don't
spend time on background, but I thought
this would be fun. Uh I was looking at
your LinkedIn and your background. The
beginning of your career, you spent 13
years at Pitchfork.
>> Yes.
>> Reviewing music. Okay. Reviewing
artists. Pitchfork was like a massive
deal. I don't know where it is today,
but it was like the most influential
music review site. Is it still a big
deal or is it less?
>> It is still a big deal. It was okay much
less of a big deal when I started
working for them and I was a 16-year-old
music nerd writing record reviews in my
bedroom at my parents apartment.
>> Okay. So, what I'm hearing is you helped
make them a big deal. Excellent. That's
impact. We're going to talk talk about
>> I was better at telling my own story.
That's exactly what I'd be saying before
I started. I was product manager number
one at Pitchfork.
>> Funny enough, like you look at your
resume, you like went into product
management from Pitchfork. Very typical
career path. By the way, if you're on
YouTube watching, there's a lot of
musical paraphernalia behind you and
awesome guitar. So, clearly there's a a
thread of music throughout your
background. Let me ask you this
question.
>> What is most similar about making music,
critique, and even critiquing music uh
and building great product?
>> The magic lies in the way people work
together. That's really what I think has
been the consistent thread between all
the work that I've done. I I spent years
as a touring musician. I still
occasionally tour in my friend Will
Chef's band. And it's that magic of
people with different perspectives,
different ideas building into something
that is somehow greater than the sum of
its individual parts and perspectives.
That's what makes this interesting.
That's what makes music magical. That's
what makes product development
interesting. Especially, you know, in
the age of AI when people have the
opportunity to, I think, close
themselves off from the messier parts of
human interaction, from those moments
where you realize that your perspective
might be limited, that somebody else
might be able to expose you to
something, show you a way of working,
show you a way of seeing that you
haven't seen before. I I think that
those interactions, that ability to
learn from and build with each other is
only going to become more valuable and
and more precious, frankly, as
technology continues to do what
technology does.
>> Wow, what a beautiful answer. I love
that. Okay, so let's get to the task at
hand. Yes.
>> So, you're known for writing one of the
most popular books in the field of
product management called Product
Management in Practice.
>> I suppose I am.
>> Yes.
basically describes the job of a product
manager, very practically, very
specifically, better than any other book
out there. You have a new book out
called impact verse product teams. I
asked you what the goal of this book was
and you said the goal was
>> what are the steps that individual
product teams can take to align their
work to business critical outcomes
regardless of how their organizations
approach product development. And I
thought this was a really nice way of
framing this conversation. There's two
important parts to this sentence that
you gave me. One is aligning your work
to business critical outcomes and the
other is steps an individual product
team can take regardless of how their
business functions. So let me start with
this first part. This is kind of the the
you named your book after this concept
of impact first. Why is aligning work to
impact and to business critical outcomes
so important? It's important because at
the end of the day, it is those business
critical outcomes against which you and
your team will be evaluated. That's the
reality of working for a business,
right? If you are contributing to the
business in a way that the business at
large can understand, that the CEO can
understand, that the CFO can understand,
if your team is a good investment for
the business, then the business will
continue making that investment. If your
team is not a good investment for the
business or you don't really know if
your team is a good investment for the
business, but you figure you're showing
up, so probably it's fine. You guess,
then that puts you in a really tenuous
position and a position that I think
we've all seen not work out terribly
well for everybody in recent history.
>> And so what is this a reaction to?
Because I imagine many people hearing
this are like, "Of course PMs, product
teams, we're driving business impact.
That's why we're here." That's not
actually the case in most cases. So,
first of all, just like
>> what is this reaction to? Is this the
reaction to people being like, "Oh,
we're just going to build great
products. We're going to listen to
customers." Talk about the the flip side
of this.
>> I mean, there's a couple things. I think
the main one is just more product
managers and teams are getting laid off.
That's a really scary reality right now.
And if you look at the messages that are
being conveyed by CEOs when they lay off
these teams, it's, you know, some of
them are pretty clear. The message that
Daniel E from Spotify sent out with
their layoffs in 2024 said, "We still
have too many teams doing work around
the work and supporting work rather than
focusing on opportunities with real
impact." And that really struck a nerve
because I've been on those supporting
teams before. I've done the work around
the work. And I've assumed that if I was
given work around the work to do that
surely it must be critical to the
business otherwise they wouldn't have
hired me to do it. I I don't think that
is a safe assumption to make. I think
especially given that we are no longer
in a zero interest rate environment
given that hiring and retaining
employees ex is you know expensive given
that companies are looking at cost
savings. I think we are in a moment
where it is really incumbent upon each
product team and each member of each
product team to be able to understand,
articulate and work towards the topline
business impact of their own work.
>> Awesome. Okay. So, where this comes from
is one uh if you're not driving
something that is directly driving
business growth, you're not as valuable
to the company. You're the kind of
person that they'd lay off.
>> There's also a flip side of finding a
job. It feels like if you have shown
impact in your resume, here's all the
impact I've driven. This also helps you
get hired. True.
>> Absolutely. Yeah. I mean, I I it's the
most common resume advice I see, right,
is like show the number. Show the
impact. Say what you did. I I have a
friend who does resume coaching. And I
showed her my resume a couple years ago
and she said, "I love your resume except
for one thing. Why do you write like a
little girl? Say what you did. Say what
your contributions were." Don't say, "I
helped. I may have maybe helped people
do this. Say the impact. Put the number
on it. And I think I needed to hear that
from her because um I think there is a
tendency especially for those of us who
do really thrive in that collaborative
environment who you know our nature is
to not want to take credit for work that
could only exist via the contributions
of many people with diverse experiences
and perspectives. It's really hard to
say like, well, I did this and I
contributed to that. But that's part of
why I wrote this book at the team level
because I think for folks like myself
who really enjoy and thrive in and enjoy
that team environment, if you can look
at the product team as the foundational
unit of impact and say we delivered
this, we were able to work together to
have this impact for the business, that
feels really good and also speaks
directly to the work that that team did
together. And
>> it's a really interesting insight. I
think a lot of this comes from just PMs
naturally are trained to deflect uh
credit and to include say we and
everything and just this person did
that. So I get where that comes from.
>> Um okay so most listeners will probably
still be thinking yes I'm driving impact
I'm great well I don't have a problem
here I don't need to change need to
change anything. What are some ways to
stress test your thinking? Maybe some
questions to ask yourself or maybe your
team of just like okay maybe I'm not. So
the first question I ask most of the
teams I work with is if you were the CEO
of this company, would you fully fund
your own team?
And that is a small question
that can provoke some big reactions
because for me when I was working as a
product manager, I truly believed that
my job was to find the next most
defensible thing to build. Build it.
celebrate it, find the next most
defensible thing to build, and so on and
so forth, rinse and repeat forever and
ever. I kind of assumed that the
existence of my team was this
righteous fact of the universe, right?
My team would always be there for all
time and it was just a matter of us
finding the next thing to work on, which
meant, you know, doing discovery and
making concessions to what leadership
wanted and doing all that stakeholder
management. But the idea that my team
came at a cost to the business that at
some point somebody might look at my
team on a spreadsheet and say, "Who are
these very expensive people? Why do we
need them?
Do we actually need them?" It just
wasn't something that crossed my mind
cuz I wasn't in the room for those
conversations. That wasn't how I was
thinking about my team's work. So, I I
like asking this question because it's a
perspective shift. It gets you thinking
if you were personally accountable for
the existential market level success of
this business,
would you invest in your team?
And frankly, most of the people I ask
that question to don't know the answer
right away. They're not sure. They say,
"I I think so." Or, "Yeah, yeah, yeah."
You know, because and and then you can
see the gears turning. And again, to me,
that is a risky situation to be in
because if you can't answer that
question as a member of the team, nobody
else in the organization is going to be
as well equipped to answer that question
as you are. So, bringing that question
to the team, asking it and answering it
proactively and collaboratively and
being ready to say, okay, if we can't
answer this confidently, what are the
changes we need to make? Do we need to
change our purview? Do we need to change
our goals? who do we need to talk to?
What do we need to do in order to make
this happen? In order to answer that
question confidently, we are much better
off having that conversation at the team
level and waiting for someone else to
have it for us or at us. So is the kind
of the signal here is if you can't
confidently say yes asking yourself this
question, your team talking through this
and having a clear answer, there's maybe
a potential problem that you need to
work on.
>> Absolutely. I think that's that's
exactly it. Yeah. Okay. And we'll talk
about what to actually do and the steps
you recommend to fix this problem, but I
want to keep talking about impact
because sometimes it takes a while for
people to be convinced. Okay, I need to
really do this versus okay, here's the
ways to do this.
>> Yeah, it it has taken me until now until
writing this book to be convinced and I
still feel like I need to be convinced a
little bit some.
>> Like I think the layoffs are a really
good convincing function for people.
Yes. Where they're seeing all these PMs
being laid off and just like how do I
avoid that? And this is basically the
answer to that is here's how you avoid
getting laid off. There's an interesting
implication in what you described here
where you encourage the the PM and the
product team to think like the CEO. This
touches on something I've been meaning
to write about but I haven't which is a
lot of people there's this argument or
PM's the mini CO like in my mind like
the PM is 100% the mini CO in terms of
they think like the CEO or they should
within the team like they are the same
they think about the business their job
is to think about the business like a
CEO within the team uh obviously they're
not in charge of everyone they can't let
get anywhere the you know reporting
lines are not the same Uh, I feel like
that's a really good lens for the job of
a co of a PM is just you're like the
mini CO on the team making sure you're
building the right things, thinking
about the business, u solving real
problems that matter.
>> I think the way I've come to think about
it is that the product manager is
responsible for the whole team thinking
like a CEO, if that makes sense.
>> I love that.
>> So, if the product manager takes that on
as their sole responsibility and says,
"I'm the mini CEO. I think about the
business." That's a missed opportunity.
In my consulting work, it's more often
than not been an engineer who's actually
able to get to that specific impact
level goal for the team. Sometimes
before the product manager does because
the engineer is is thinking in systems
is thinking about okay, I know this
system, I know this other system, I've
had this conversation with this person.
I think I see how this can all fit
together. Sometimes it's a designer or a
UX researcher who understands what
customers need and who has that direct
firsthand knowledge. So I think you know
the way that I certainly initially
misinterpreted the mini CEO thing was
you are solely in charge of this as
opposed to you are the person who brings
that kind of CEO level commercial
thinking to the team. And I I've been
much more inclined of late to see the
product manager's job as to bring in and
facilitate that conversation rather than
to be the sole owner of that
conversation. That is a really good uh
nuance to what I said uh and it makes
all the sense in the world. Following
these lines of what is the job of a
product manager, you have a really nice
way of just thinking about it. What is
what is the role of a what does a
business expect from a product manager?
>> Yeah. Um you know my my favorite
definition of product management comes
from Melissa Perry's book escaping the
build trap where she describes product
management as facilitating a value
exchange. Right? You're facilitating a
value exchange between a business and
its customers.
The actual shape and nature of that
value exchange depends on so many
things, right? It depends on your
funding model. It depends on your
business model. It depends on whether
you're B2B or B TOC. It depends on
whether you're publicly traded or
privately held. There are so many
different variables that go into what a
business expects from product teams. And
I I one thing I've I've come to is that
I I am, you know, I'm probably too
hesitant to generalize in general. aside
from that generalization I just made.
But I think that
the best product managers and teams I've
worked with are really curious to
understand what success means to their
particular business. So if that's a
startup, how much runway do we have?
What do we need to raise that next
round? Are our investors looking for
growth? Are they looking for
profitability? What are they looking for
in order for us to reach that next
existential milestone? If we're a
publicly traded company, what are
investors looking for? What have we told
shareholders? What's in our next
perspectives? What are we saying we're
going to deliver to the market at large?
This information usually exists
somewhere, but it's really easy to get
disconnected from it as we go about the
day-to-day work of doing product
management. I've been in a lot of rooms
having workshops and sessions with teams
I work with where they're pulling up the
last town hall meeting to look for
slides from their CEO because you know
they're so busy they have so many
day-to-day things to deal with that for
them that town hall day is like okay
finally I can just not have to deal with
people emailing me every 10 seconds.
It's a chance to like take a deep breath
and then get back to the stuff that
really matters. But those top level
things, those promises that have been
made to the market at large, to the
board, to the shareholders,
those are often a great place to start
for understanding what exactly your
business is looking for. So you can
figure out how your team's work helps
contribute to success in the terms that
matter most to the business. That's an
amazing segue to exactly where I wanted
to go, which is uh this quote that is
exactly what you just said. The question
you should be asking, it's kind of a
different version of the one you shared
earlier, which is what are we doing to
contribute to the success of the
business?
>> Yeah.
>> So, what is it that you think people are
thinking instead? Most often,
>> it's interesting. We live in a world
where for the last 20 years of product
development, we've been all about best
practices. We love best practices. And I
love best practices, too. I think best
practices can be really valuable, can be
really useful. I love how much knowledge
sharing there is out there. When I
started 15 years ago, it was so much
harder to get any sense of how anybody
was doing anything. But I think the
downside of this is that there are a lot
of folks who are really really fixated
on doing things the right way. And a lot
of the writing and thinking about doing
things the right way exists in kind of
this middle layer between impact and
day-to-day work, right? So if you have
impact the overall success of the
business, revenue, growth, profits, then
from there you set objectives and you do
initiatives and then you do bets and
then you make a strategy and then you do
your day-to-day work. I think the
tendency among a lot of product teams is
to key to those middle pieces to say,
okay, what we're doing is on strategy.
What we're doing is part of objectives.
We did OKRs, right? We we set, you know,
we spent three weeks coming up with our
OKRs for three months. It's OKR season
everybody. We have to pretend to care
about our goals. And I read a book that
says we have to have five to seven
objectives with five to seven key
results. And we want the score of each
one to be a point 6 or a 7. And at the
end of the day,
you've actually spent so much time and
energy being really clever and cascading
these things into these intermediate
steps that each step has incurred more
and more risk that we might not achieve
that impact we seek to drive. Each time
we abstract things out, each time we
cascade things from impact to something
else until we wind up with a checklist
of features to build, we're assuming
that if we then build that checklist of
features, dot dot dot, we will have a
successful business. But honestly, most
of the companies and teams I work with,
if I ask them how their lowest level
goals add up to their highest level
goals, they look at me like I just asked
them the most impossible question in the
world. Because by the time you get
things down to that level,
maybe it's going to work, maybe it's not
going to work. There are assumptions
baked into each of those levels. You
might go through the motions of doing
OKRs the right way or doing strategy the
right way, but that doesn't guarantee
that your strategy is going to work. It
doesn't mean that your OKRs are going to
add up to what your investors or your
shareholders need to see. So, I think
there's a tendency among product teams
to really sweat the middle and to get
really stressed out if the middle is not
in perfect theoretical harmony with
itself. If the objectives are a little
out of line with the initiatives or a
little out of line with the bets are a
little out of line with the domains. But
at the end of the day, I don't think
I've ever worked for a company where
these things add up to a perfect
breadcrumb trail. You can trace back
from we prioritized these bits of work
in this sprint because it adds up to
this objective which is part of this
strategy which adds up to this
initiative which is part of this bet
which will deliver this much impact.
It's just not how things work in the
real world.
>> I feel like a lot of listeners are like
that sounds very familiar exactly what
you just described. Again, we're going
to talk about what to change and what
how to make this work better to actually
align your teams with impact. But I want
to first talk about something that kind
of follows this thread you're on, which
is Yes. something you call the low
impact PM death spiral.
>> Yes.
>> Talk about what that looks like.
>> Spiral.
>> I love the hands.
>> Um
>> the low impact death spiral is the
dynamic in which every medium to large
company I've ever worked with finds
itself in one way or another. And
honestly, a lot of small product
companies do as well. And it goes
something like this. It starts with
teams taking on low impact work, adding
little features here and there, making
little cosmetic improvements because
it's easier. It invites less scrutiny,
and you're you're less likely to mess up
something important, right? The analogy
I use sometimes is if you're working on
a car,
if you put your hands in the engine, you
might make the car run really well or
you might make it so that the car
doesn't run at all. If you have the
option of doing that or like decking out
the car with a paint job and rhinestones
and making it look really, really cool,
what are you going to choose to do? I
know for me, I would choose the
rhinestones every time, right? Because
then the car runs however it runs.
Whoever else is the expert in engines
can fix the engine, but I'm going to do
this thing which everyone can see. All
the executives can look at it and say,
"Wow, look at how cool this car looks."
And it's not going to do any harm.
Right? What's the worst that could
happen? We can always take the paint
off.
The problem is if you have 10 teams
adding rhinestones to a car, eventually
the hood of the car is going to be so
heavy that you can't lift it to get to
the engine anymore. And that's exactly
what happens in most product
organizations. As you have more and more
teams adding in these little features,
making little enhancements, adding
features which might get some usage, but
you know, they're not going to take away
any anything meaningful. They're not
going to mess with the commercial engine
of the business. You have more folks
building in and the hood of the car gets
heavier and heavier. The product gets
more and more complicated. You have all
these little bits that have little
dependencies on each other and the
product becomes as I think most modern
products are a collection of loosely
connected features rather than a single
guided experience.
What does that mean? That means
internally
building anything becomes a lot harder,
right? Because there's 10 product teams
that have to manage dependencies
whenever you want to build something. So
companies start adding program
management layers. They're like, "We
have too many meetings. we need to reorg
program management because reorggs fix
everything and we need to make sure that
we have all these layers and people are
connected and we're doing dependency
management. But as you add more of those
things, it becomes harder and harder to
do high impact work. The hood just gets
heavier and heavier and heavier, which
in turn sends teams deeper and deeper
down the rabbit hole of low impact work.
Low impact work begets low impact work.
The more low impact work you do, the
harder it is to do high impact work, the
more likely you are to do low impact
work, and so on and so forth. It goes
and goes and goes until the next round
of layoffs. And this is a real problem.
I've experienced this at again pretty
much every company I've worked with. And
it's been really interesting to see how
often the breaking of that cycle comes
down to individual product teams being
brave enough to look at their own work
and look at what matters to the business
and say, you know what, we are not going
to incur the risk of being a low impact
team anymore. We are going to
proactively seek out high impact work
and we're going to deliver even if it
means we have to coordinate with a lot
of other teams. Even if it means that
suddenly the executive team takes a
really big interest in the work that
we're doing. We're going to see that as
signs that the work we're doing matters
not as things that are going to be an
impediment to getting the work done.
>> As you just kind of alluded to, there's
a big implication here of even if you
are told to build a thing that the execs
are really excited about that is low
impact in your opinion, that's no
excuse. You're still going to get fired
eventually even though they're like
telling you to build it. It it sucks,
but that's how it goes. And it's funny,
I worked with Mailchimp for three years
leading up to their acquisition by into
it when they were on this really
interesting journey of going from a
single product company to a platform
company, which is a journey that a lot
of companies are on, right? Where they
found success in one part of the market
and they say, you know what, we
recognize that there's a value ad in
working more horizontally and giving
people a suite of tools they can use. We
want to build these tools and really
make sure that we are meeting the needs
of our small and medium business
customers.
So I was brought on shortly after they
did a reorg. They went into a domains
model. They had different teams that
were supposed to be experts on different
parts of this marketing platform that
were building in new features.
and their VP product, Natalyia Williams,
who then became their CPO.
You she said, "This is great that we're
doing this, but I'm worried that we're
going to lose sight of
the commercial fundamentals." Right? We
have these teams building this really
cool stuff. And we've been so clear that
we're excited about the teams that are
working on initiative that are building
these new things that are building out
this platform. But let's make sure we
stay focused on on making sure that the
entire platform grows in a healthy and
sustainable way and that as we are
adding in these new features and
functionalities, we're not making this
so crowded and complicated that it's
harder for people to get value out of
it. So she set a very clear goal for the
product team. She wanted a specific
change in the rate of users who
successfully send their first email. She
was like, "As we build these new things,
email is still where people are coming
in. We want to make sure that they can
do this successfully." And she set a
really ambitious goal for the entire
product organization.
And
she put it forth to the product teams.
a lot of product teams were
understandably hesitant to take this on
for a number of reasons, right? They
said, "This is like if we mess this up,
that's the entire commercial heart of
the business. Like that's really risky."
Other ones said, "But that's great, but
you know, we we're building out these
new parts of the platform that are
really important. We don't want to risk
slowing those things down."
There was one product manager I worked
with who really understood how important
this was. She had worked on enough
different parts of the app at that
point. She had been on a growth team so
she really had that kind of user centric
how do we hit the metrics we need to hit
mindset
and and she came to me and she was like
I want to make sure we do this because
I'm worried about what'll happen if we
don't do this right. I don't want to be
on the product team that failed to
deliver what matters most to the
business. So, she went and worked with
some user researchers and found where
people were getting stuck. She did this
amazing study finding where people were
getting stuck before they sent that
first email. And she gathered together a
group of product managers. I'll never
forget this. I was on site in Atlanta
and she gathered together a group of
product managers and she was like,
"Look, these are the things we need to
fix if we're going to hit this, but if
we fix these things, I think we can do
it. I think we can get there." And
there was a moment of of silence where
again for totally understandable reasons
people were like
okay you know this is this is great I
see it but like I'm I'm kind of afraid
that if we do this and this product
manager I will never forget this she
looks around the room and she says you
know what I am going to haunt all of you
in your dreams if you do not take this
on. This is the most important thing for
the business and everyone laughed. It
was a it was a strong comment, but it
was a strong comment made in really good
faith that in its own way I think
acknowledged the fear that people had
about taking this on. She was like look
this is really important and if we work
together if we care less about the
constraints and parameters and you know
borders of our domains and care more
about how we work together to deliver
the thing that our leader has told us is
the most important thing for the
business. we can get this done. And they
did get it done. And they got it done
through subtracting. They streamlined
the experience. They took out steps that
people were getting stuck on. They made
things easier. They did the kinds of
things that are rarely celebrated in the
way that traditional feature launches
were celebrated. But because they had
this clear, impactful, specific sense of
what success looks like, they were able
to take on that work themselves. and it
made the product better, made the
business better. Um, and it was just a
great moment of working with with a
great team.
>> That was an awesome example. I love just
how much of a hero's journey this this
example was. Along those lines, it's
interesting how much courage it takes to
do this because to your point, the easy
thing is just okay, everyone's just
telling us to do this thing. We're going
to build this feature. Great, easy. I
don't have to put myself out there. And
what you're pointing out there is uh
it's up to you to recognize what you're
doing is not high impact and to have
courage to push back and suggest
something else. The funny thing is it's
it's courage but it's also a kind of
radical acceptance of reality. There's a
very kind of emotional philosophical
dimension to this conversation because I
think it is in human nature to not want
to be accountable for things outside of
our control. Impact is not something we
can just check off a list, right? If
we're really working towards business
impact, that means that there are things
that might happen in the market that are
going to affect us, right? Our
competitors might launch something.
There might be a pandemic or a war or
something we didn't expect. We are
relying upon customers to to change
their behavior to convert or to upgrade
or to do whatever it is we hope they
will do. I use the word hope because
again we can do our best to influence
that behavior but we can't just check
box and I think there is this very
understandable
human fear of being accountable for
things that are beyond our control. I
get that so hard but what I I think the
last couple years have shown us is that
we are accountable for things outside of
our control. The success of the
businesses we work for is ultimately
beyond our immediate control. and you
can follow all the best practices and
have the highest velocity and do
everything quote unquote right, but if
your company goes out of business,
they're not going to say, "Yeah, we're
going out of business, but we're going
to keep, you know, writing your paycheck
for 2 years because you all of your OKRs
were a 6 or a 7." That's not how it
works. The reality is that things
outside of our control affect us. And I
think that if we can internalize that,
there's a real freedom in it. You know,
the thing that surprised me most when I
was researching this book is that the
commercially minded PMs I interviewed
were also the happiest, which I did not
expect at all. You know, as as you said,
I come from a music background. I was
expecting the the business people to be
really stressed out and like I have to
show up at work 92 hours a day to crush
it and make sure that we hit the metrics
and and crush the numbers. But they were
just like, "Yeah, I work for a business
and I do the best I can and then I go
home. You know, when I'm at work, my job
is to help the business succeed and I do
that by understanding our business
model, by trying to do work that
contributes to what the business wants.
In order to do that, if my goals are
really impact level goals, I have to
learn about our customers. I have to do
discovery. I have to do all these things
that we're supposed to do. not because
they're abstract best practices, but
because that's how you build a
successful product. And then at the end
of the day, you know, I'm not fighting
my company to do product the right way.
And if they can't do it the right way,
I'll I'll, you know, I'm willing to die
on this hill. It's like, I work for a
company. I don't get to make every
decision. There are things outside of my
control. I'll do the best I can, and I
get to free up a little bit of energy to
live the rest of my life. To make this
even less scary hopefully, I'm curious
what your answer is going to be here. Do
you find that people who take this leap
and push back and try to change the way
their teams are thinking and what they
take on, do you find that even if they
fail, even if the impact wasn't there
and the project fails, they are seen
more favorably and their career ends up
doing better and they end up doing
better even if the project fails.
>> I hope so. You know, I'm always super
again, it's outside of my control,
right? I can't say like if you do these
things then you will be looked favorably
you will be looked upon favorably by the
people who manage you because I don't
know those people and maybe they're not
going to react well maybe they're not
actually you know people are not always
rational and these things don't always
play out the way you hope they will say
is there's a story in the book in Impact
first product teams about somebody who
worked for a dating app and they were
given a project to work on which had a
very specific ambitious revenue goal and
at a certain point it became clear that
they were probably not going to be able
to hit this because of other things they
needed to do. So they went to the
finance team and said, "Hey, we have to
adjust this down." And the finance team
said, "Yeah, of course you do. That
makes sense. Let's adjust it down
together." Would that conversation have
played out the same way if they had not
taken that step of saying proactively
based on what is happening in the
broader world in the market in our
product we no longer believe we are on
track to hit this but we want to adjust
so that the company at large can make
better predictions and resource things
accordingly I don't know but I think
again if you are embracing that mindset
that there are things outside of your
control and your job is to do what you
can from where you sit to contribute to
the success of the business I think
you're certainly doing so much more by
telling the business honestly what you
think is possible and what's going to
happen as opposed to
stepping back from it and saying like,
"Oh, well, if we talk about it, we're
going to get in trouble and nobody's
going to believe us." And you know that
just that simple withholding of
information
does its own kind of harm. So I can't
guarantee any kind of outcomes. I can
say yes this will be received with uh
with with you know with generosity and
grace in all cases but I I think it's
it's the right thing to do. My sense is
either you will be respected more highly
because you are you're kind of solving
problems for people that that like
higher ups that you're seeing things
that they should be seeing and you're
right and they're like oh wow Matt's
amazing he saw all this stuff and
changed or you realize this is not the
company for me. They are just not they
don't value this. They just want me to
ship this widget and that's all they
want for me. I don't why why I could I
could do I could do more somewhere else.
I think you touched on something really
important there which is that when you
understand the business model, you
understand the real world ethics and
priorities of the company you work for.
Right? If you understand what the
company's optimizing for, what they
really care about, what trade-offs and
sacrifices they're willing to make in
order to achieve those goals, that tells
you a lot more than the mission
statement, which you know, usually
sounds great. But if you follow the
money, if you follow the decision-m,
sometimes it paints a different picture.
And I think the more you can understand
how the business model works, what that
value exchange is, what value is being
delivered, what value is being
extracted,
that I think puts you in a better
position to decide, you know, if I were
to help the company achieve success, do
I feel good about that? Do I feel like
this is a company that if it achieves
its goals, has made the world a better
place or not? And the more you
understand the business model, the
better equipped you are to make those
decisions with all the information
available to you. I think
>> that's such an important point. Today's
episode is brought to you by Anthropic,
the team behind Claude. I use Claude at
least 10 times a day. I use it for
researching my podcast guest, for
brainstorming title ideas for both my
podcast and my newsletter, for getting
feedback on my writing and all kinds of
stuff. Just last week, I was preparing
for an interview with a very fancy
guest, and I had Claude tell me, "What
are all the questions that other podcast
hosts have asked this guest so that I
don't ask them these questions?" How
much time do you spend every week trying
to synthesize all of your user research,
insights, support tickets, sales calls,
experiment results, and competitive
intel? Claude can handle incredibly
complex multi-step work. You can throw a
100page strategy document at it and ask
it for insights. Or you can dump all
your user research and ask it to find
patterns. With Cloud 4 and the new
integrations, including Cloud4 Opus, the
world's best coding model, you get voice
conversations, advanced research
capabilities, direct Google Workspace
integration, and now MCP connections to
your custom tools and data sources.
Claude just becomes part of your
workflow. If you want to try it out, get
started at claude.ai/enny.
And using this link, you get an
incredible 50% off your first 3 months
of the pro plan. That's claude.ai/enny.
Okay, so let's shift to talking about
how to actually what to do.
>> Yeah.
>> Kind of this concept of actions you can
take regardless of how your company
operates. And that first part is really
important. And something that I've seen
you big on is is you don't let people
have an excuse for not pushing on this.
And we've talked about this in other
ways, but just maybe share more of just
like you don't have an excuse, no matter
how your company operates, to not uh
think deeply about this and try to make
change.
>> Yeah. I mean, the reality is that most
companies that product managers work at
aren't big tech companies. And when I
work with product teams at those
companies, at insurance companies or at
banks or at CPG companies or I worked
with a company a while ago that makes
audio equipment, which was obviously
really fun for me, the first thing they
usually tell me is, well, you know, we
can't do product the right way because
we're a regulated industry or because
we're B2B or because we have these
quarterly earnings targets we need to
hit. And that always makes me a little
sad because yes, there's a way of
looking at it where you can say, "All
right, if these five famous companies do
product management the right way, then
anything that puts us in a different
situation from those companies must mean
that we're doing product management the
wrong way, which is demoralizing and
distressing and again leads people to
these kind of quicksotic battles of like
I have to turn a bank into a search
engine, which is not going to happen."
But the other way of looking at it is
that those constraints
are how you do product management. Those
are what guide you to the commercial
decisions you should be making. If
you're regulated, your competitors are
regulated, too. If you can really
understand those constraints, figure out
how to work well within them, that's a
huge commercial advantage for your
business. If you're B2B, I honestly
prefer working with B2B companies in a
lot of situations because they have such
immediate access to their customers and
they can understand the whole system of
their customers and their users and how
these things connect in a way that's
really immediate and actionable.
Similarly, if your company has quarterly
financial targets to hit,
congratulations. You know what the
business really cares about, you don't
have to go looking much farther than
that. You don't necessarily need to
cascade that 10 different levels into 45
OKRs. If you can do work that you know
feeds directly into what the company
cares about the most. So yes, these
things are are constraints, but they are
the constraints that shape the work that
we do. And if we embrace them as such,
if we treat them as guides,
not restrictions, if we say like we're
working with not against the commercial
realities of our business, there's so
much we can do. There's so much that
product managers and product owners and
project managers that everybody working
on product at every organization can do
if we again work with not against the
realities of the companies we work for.
>> Okay. So, I think that's really
empowering. You're not saying you need
to change the way product is built at
your company. It's up to you. You're an
ICPM. It's up to you. No excuses.
What's a simple way to describe what
you're actually saying, which I think is
going to make people feel a lot better.
>> What I'm actually saying
is that the things you think you're
fighting against are usually the things
that are giving your work shape if you
let them be.
>> Awesome. Let's talk about you. You have
three steps, three handy steps to become
more of an impact first product team. So
let's talk through them.
>> Yeah.
>> What is step one?
>> Yeah. So the first step and and I think
the most important and where a lot of my
work plays out is in setting team goals
close to company goals. No more than one
step away from company goals. This idea
comes from Christina Wood's book,
Radical Focus. She had a great episode
on your podcast that I just rewatched uh
for inspiration before I came on here.
>> Nice move.
>> Um but in that book, she has this visual
where she says that most companies
approach cascading OKRs as kind of this
multi-level like at the top is company
goals, then department goals, then big
team goals, then small team goals, then
smaller team goals, which leads to the
very situation I described where you
can't add those small team goals back up
to the company goals.
She has a visual that she compares that
to which is like the company goal as a
center of gravity and then every other
team goal orbiting one level around it.
And this blew my mind when I saw it for
the first time because whether you're
doing OKRs or KPIs or Northstar metrics,
whatever framework you're ostensibly
using, if you use it well, it looks like
that. I worked with a team a while ago
that was a traditional feature team at a
fintech company. They were the team that
was kind of like the team I worked with
at Mailchimp, kind of given new features
to build to take this product and build
it more into a multi-product platform.
And the business would say, "Go build
this." They'd build it. They'd
celebrate. They'd say, "Go build this."
They'd build it. They'd celebrate. And
then the business said, "Okay, we're
going to do things a little bit
differently now. Now we have this
topline revenue target. We want to make
this much more money next year, and we
want you to tell us how you're going to
contribute to this."
And this was a really challenging
conversation for this team because as
much as people complain about being
feature factories, again, it feels
safer, right? There's more control over
that. If you're told what to build, you
have a lot more control over whether or
not you build it than you do over
whether or not it generates revenue.
So, we started having this conversation,
you know, what what framework should be
used, how should we do this? And I I I
was not asking very good questions. I
was kind of panicking too to be honest.
And then I asked them, I was like,
"Okay, why does this team exist, right?
Why do we why are we doing this at all?
Like why is the business investing in
this big team to build all these
features? Why do we care if we're a
single product company or a
multi-product platform company?" And one
of the team leaders said, "Oh, well
actually the customer lifetime value of
a multi-product user is much higher than
that of a single product user." And I
was like, "Oh,
do we know how much higher?" And they
said, "Yeah, we actually have a number
on that." And I was like, "Wow, so like
if we had a goal of converting a certain
number of single product users to
multi-product users, we know exactly how
much revenue is on the lot." They were
like, "Yeah, I guess." So, so we were
able to set a goal and from there we had
this conversation about, you know,
what's the number we would need to hit
to make this team feel like a good
investment and we came to a specific
number and that number informed every
decision that was made by that team for
the rest of the year. We said by the end
of the year we need to convert this many
single product users to multi-product
users because if we do that there's this
much additional revenue which
contributes this much to the company's
topline revenue goal. It's one step
away. And when they went and shared that
goal with company leadership, they got
it right away. They didn't have to say,
"Well, why is this valuable?" They
didn't have to say, "What are your other
OKRs? Show us the deck." They got it.
And that gave them so much leeway to
make bolder decisions, to work more
closely with other teams, to ask for the
resources they needed. And that process
of of arriving at that goal, that goal
that is impactful and specific and one
step away from what the company cares
about the most is probably the the most
valuable way I have spent my time with
teams of late because once you get to
that, you see how everything else flows
from there.
>> And the implication here is that if it's
too far away from helping from people
understanding what the hell are you guys
even doing to help the business, that's
the problem you want to avoid. So
exactly like so one extreme is uh I
don't know like it probably doesn't make
sense for your team to have exactly the
same goal as the company. Say your
company's trying to grow 100 million
revenue, right? Like that's not going to
be your team's goal.
>> So it's almost like at that extreme is
what's one step away from that? What's
your contribution to that company goal?
The other end is just like some 10 level
deep. We're going to improve conversion
of this random step which is going to
grow this thing which grows that and
then that grows revenue. Exactly. What
is your guidance on revenue-based goals
as goals for teams?
>> You know, I think again it depends. I I
know people have very strong opinions
about teams should always or should
never have revenue- based goals. I don't
think it's that simple. I think
sometimes yes, if your company is
working towards revenue, having a
revenue-based goal makes sense or at
least being able to put some value in
terms of revenue on the work that your
team is doing. I've worked with some
startups where they actively are not
going after revenue because right now
the name of the game is growth, right?
They want to show that they have enough
users to
raise that next round of investment. I
actually worked with one startup where
their revenue was going up and their
number of users was going up
and we had to have a really interesting
conversation around which one actually
matters to our investors. And we kind of
wound up developing these two scenarios,
the high growth scenario and the low
growth scenario. And talking to the
product team, it was really clear that
there was like no way they were going to
hit the high growth scenario. So they
pivoted to focus on profitability so
they could build more runway and raise
that next round as a smaller business
with a sustainable revenue base. So I
get why people are hesitant to commit to
revenue goals. I think that there are
certainly situations where revenue goals
would be too broad or not exactly what
the business needs. But at the end of
the day,
money is how the impact of most teams is
going to be measured. And if you don't
have a point of view on why your team is
a good investment, either in the money
return it brings or in another return
that is equally or more important to the
business, then again, that feels like a
tenuous and risky position to be in. to
kind of get people's brains noodling in
the right direction. What are some
examples of good goals like specific
goals that your teams have set that are
one step away from a company goal? What
are just some examples without naming
companies?
>> I have a a story to tell to that effect
which also sets up the second step here
which is to keep impact first at every
step. So I worked with a growth team at
a a a tech company that that is beloved
by many people and I was brought on to
help them set OKRs, right? The company
was doing OKRs across the board and this
team was going to set its growth OKRs.
So they had done a lot of reading, a lot
of research into how to do OKRs the
right way. They had read unfortunately
they had not read Radical Focus um or
they hopefully would have done things
differently. They had read a lot of
other books. They had printed out a lot
of articles and they said, you know,
we're going to make sure we get this
right. We're going to put together a
slide deck that has five to seven
objectives with five to seven key
results each and each key result is
going to have an owner and we're going
to make sure that people are accountable
for it and we're going to really really
do this the right way. We're going to
get that middle piece perfect. So, they
spent a long time working on these OKRs.
OKR season ends. They file away the OKR
deck, not to be seen until the next OKR
season. We reconvene and spend a whole
day scoring all of the OKRs, right? And
there are heated conversations about
what's a 6 versus a 7, is this a 0.9?
Who really should be the owner of this
key result? Who contributed the most to
it? And um you know, we we get through
this whole conversation. Everyone's
tired and and I'm like, I there's just
one question I need to ask. I'm so sorry
to do this to y'all, but how does this
all add up to the company level growth
goals?
People kind of look around. They're
like, "Well, that
that wasn't what we did." Like, we set
our team level OKRs and we went through
the process and we made sure and and we
we followed the OKRs. thought about the
OKRs
and I said, "Yeah, but the the company
has a a goal of let's call it bringing
on a million new users in this year.
We're a growth team. How many users did
we bring on?"
And
there's a moment of silence and the
leader of this team is really really
good leader. She stands up and she's
like, "Okay, we're going to do things
differently." She steps up to the
whiteboard, puts 1 million on the right
end of the whiteboard, draws a line.
This is the year. Draws a little tick on
the line. This is where we are now. It's
a smaller number than a million. This is
where we need to get to.
If our conversation doesn't start with
this, I don't want to have the
conversation. And if you are 51% sure
that a different approach is going to
get us 1% closer, I expect you to
advocate for that approach. And this is
now how we are going to do everything.
And I think about that all the time
because
it's subtracting steps, right? It's
making things less complicated. It
actually is doing exactly what you
described. It's saying like this is what
the company cares about. We're the
growth team. We need to figure out how
everything we're doing contributes to
this. And that story really stuck with
me.
because it seems like it should be
obvious, right? If you're the growth
team at a company with a growth goal,
obviously that's going to be something
you care about. But it's so easy in the
day-to-day work of setting these
intermediate goals, of doing strategy,
of doing the things we do to make things
just a little bit more complicated that
they need to be. So for this particular
team and this particular moment, a good
goal was looking at the company level
goal and saying if we're the team that's
driving growth,
we're accountable for this. We're going
to step up and we're going to do
everything we can to make sure the
company meets its ambition. And it's so
obvious, you know, if you're if you come
at it from the perspective you shared
earlier, if you're the CEO, well, would
you fund this team? Like if you see our
goal is a million users. This team will
drive us 100,000 users assuming that's a
lot for you. Like obviously we want that
team to do great and we're going to give
them the resources to do that because we
they're going to contribute meaningfully
to the goal. Like it's very obvious as
you see it. Uh the trick is a lot of
people think they are doing that and
they're not. One maybe one heristic I
think about as you're talking is just
like how do you know if you're doing
this is there should be a very simple
spreadsheet formula of just here's the
company goal here is your goal there
should be like one simple formula that
translates up that adds to it
>> one why statement and or one
mathematical operator is usually the way
I think about it
>> there we go
>> um in some cases like the story I told
about that fintech company it's
something like upgraded users that's one
step right you multiply that by the
increased customer lifetime value. In
some cases, it's a smaller unit of the
same thing. So, it's a subset of the
revenue or growth that the company's
trying to deliver. I worked with a
company recently that had a team
rebuilding their ad tech platform. This
is a big company that does a lot of
different things. And at the heart of
all of their different offerings is this
ad tech platform. And I was brought on
to do a dayong workshop with this
company because this was a really
important team and they were struggling
to figure out what success looked like.
So I said, "Okay, what are your goals?"
And they said, "Here's the deck with our
goals." And I said, "That's a lot of
goals. I I wouldn't be able to make
decisions with those goals." They said,
"Oh, wait, wait, wait. No, we also have
a Murro board." Cuz we went through this
and we decided the deck was too much, so
we also have a Miro board. But as neuro
boards tend to do, it kind of grew and
grew and grew in all directions. So now
it's a big neurobo.
Turned out they had two muro boards
because they had tried to do this twice.
So we sat down and we
did this really interesting kind of
subtractive exercise where everybody got
a post-it note to write down what they
think the most important goal of the
team is. And then they would pair up and
they would have to make it smaller each
time. Make it more concise. If there
were two things, get it down to one
thing. If there were 10 words, bring it
down to eight words. Make it smaller and
more concise each time. And we came up
with two options. One was, you know,
build a fantastic, wonderful, magical,
beautiful platform to increase our
team's profits by 20%.
Fair enough. The other one was build a
stupendous, wonderful, fantastic
platform to increase our team's profits
in the next financial year from 20
million to 100 million pounds.
And I'm looking at these and I'm like,
okay, so we we know that there is an
expectation of revenue here, right?
There's an expectation that we will
drive profitability,
but one of these is 20% and the other is
500%.
Where do these numbers come from?
And you know the the folks who had said
20%, they were like that that feels like
a good return, right?
And what's interesting was, you know,
when I was telling the story when I was
giving some talks recently and people
would kind of laugh like, oh, they named
the wrong number, but like they were so
brave to do that and them saying 20% is
what actually unlocked the conversation
at the team level because somebody else
in the room heard that and said, "Wait,
I do remember something about profits.
There was some target we were supposed
to hit, but I think I remember it being
a lot bigger than that." They actually
went back and found a town hall that
their VP had given and buried in a slide
in that town hall was this 100 million
pound profit target by the end of the
next financial year.
So they have this number and they start
to go like, "Oh gosh, that's a lot."
Like, but you know, it's a whole
financial year. It'll be fine. And we
do, again, inspired by that leader I
work with, I just put this out on a
whiteboard. I'm like, "All right, 100
million in profits by the end of the
next financial year." Right now, we're
here. What else should be on this
timeline? Somebody said, "Well, we're
launching this in October." So, I put
October up there. I go, "Okay, so if we
don't ship anything until October, and
right now it's March, how much profit do
we make until that?" I said, "About 10
million." Okay. So, so that means that
between October and March, we need to
generate
90 million pounds of profits.
And this team,
I was worried that they were going to
freak out or they were going to be like,
"Oh, we can't do this. It's impossible."
But they they were like, "Okay, it's
time to step up. It's time to do all
these things that we need to do. We need
to ship sooner. We need to do more
validation. We need to do more testing.
Can we commercialize things sooner? Can
we do more discovery to make sure that
this is really going to have the impact
we need to have? Why are we doing this
whole big relaunch? Why don't we rebuild
individual things? What impact would we
have if we brought more people in top of
funnel now? Can we begin building our
user base and then upgrade that user
base? What are the trade-offs if we do
that versus if we bring people? All
those things that that I think is is
really the the heart and the intent of
these best practices. They came to life
because this team had clarity. they
understood like okay we are accountable
for something which is specific enough
to drive some real urgency and which is
impactful enough that we have to get out
there and do all these things that we're
supposed to do. So you know that to me
is a really good example of how
if you start with this question of like
what is what is expected of this team?
What does success look like for us?
It'll often lead you
to kind of the right kind of
neighborhood of what kind of unit of
measure you want to look for, how the
business is going to look to you,
whether they're looking directly at
revenue, whether they're looking at
something else. Okay, these stories are
awesome. So, basically, so far the two
steps uh that you've illustrated here of
doing this correctly, step one is set
teams goal. Set team goals that are
close to company goals. And then step
two is do this at every step of the
product building process. It's not just
a onetime thing at the beginning,
>> right? As you're doing OKRs, like that
team I talked about, you know, when
you're thinking about your company
strategy, when you're writing epics,
whatever it is, keep that impactful goal
top of mind. Don't let it slip away.
Don't let it get cascaded into oblivion.
>> Because to your point, the examples you
shared where you think you're like
you're just like, "Cool, we have our
goal. Let's And then you spend months
doing this thing and then you forget,
okay, this actually got disconnected
from the company goal and everything
you've worked hard to do is just no one
cares.
>> Yeah. Okay. Uh what is step three?
>> Step three is to connect every bit of
work back to impact. So this is when we
get to the prioritization piece, right?
So impact estimation is something that
is written about quite well quite
extensively in product management stuff
but it's something that it's easy to not
do. Um, you know, I work with a lot of
teams that want to know again the right
best practice for doing prioritization,
whether that's, you know, should we use
ice or rice or Moscow or whatever it is,
what's the right way to do
prioritization?
And,
you know, again, like it depends, but if
you don't have a clear and specific
sense of what impact means, you can't
really prioritize effectively. So this
is where again everything comes back to
that first step of the way you set
goals. So that team I told you about
that had the goal of converting single
product users to multi-product users.
One of the product managers on that team
came back to me a few months later and
said, "Hey Matt, I could really use your
help figuring out how to do
prioritization. Should we do ICE? Should
we do Rice? Should we do Moscow?" I I
put together an ICE matrix where I
scored impact and I scored certainty and
I scored effort and I multiplied each
one by each one and I have a list of the
things we should do and I said that's
awesome and and I do really think it's
awesome when people take the initiative
to do the thing to say like I put this
together let's walk through it. So when
they showed me this you know I said
let's start with impact. They're like
okay well here's the score for each one.
I was like how do you what's the score?
They're like oh you know it's a lot of
different things. And I said, okay,
well, we have a team goal of a certain
specific number of users we need to
convert by the end of the year. So,
let's try to express impact as a
function of that goal. So, rather than
an abstract score, what is the most
number of users we could convert in each
of these different scenarios?
And understandably, they were kind of
like, well, you know, I don't know
exactly like it might like, let's just
let's just work through it. We don't
have to be precise, right? It's called
impact estimation, not impact getting
perfect number. So, you know, for one of
them, they were like, "Well, we can do
this landing page." I'm like, "Okay,
well, how many people hit the landing
page?" And they were like, "Not that
many. Like, maybe a few hundred." I'm
like, "Okay, cool. So, that's maybe a
few hundred."
And and there was one thing which they
were really reluctant. It had a a high
effort score and a medium certainty
score. And what they basically said was
like, look, if we really wanted to do
this, we could redesign the entire
onboarding experience, right? We could
make it so that rather than us trying to
like retroactively shuttle people into
multi-product usage, we can understand
them right when they join and get them
into the right category of user right
away. I'm like, that sounds amazing.
What's the most impact that could have?
And they were like,
it would get us all the way there if we
did it right, but we'd have to work with
these other teams and we'd have to work
with marketing and there are so many
dependencies and so many things outside
of our control that we don't know if we
could do it. And I said, that's okay.
Like these are the trade-offs we make as
product managers. You will have some
things to work on that are going to have
less impact but might be easier and more
certain to deliver. But if this thing
could get us all the way there, if it's
really the only thing we're looking at,
which has really any chance of getting
us to our goal, which remember we came
up with to answer the question, what
does this team need to deliver to be a
good investment for the business, then I
I think it's it's worth going for it.
It's worth having those conversations
with other product teams. It's worth
talking to folks in marketing. it's
worth, you know, stretching ourselves a
little bit and saying this is going to
be challenging to do, but if we can do
it, we can really deliver on something
which we're going to feel great about.
So, you know, the the way that that
third step manifests itself the most
frequently tactically is are we
estimating and measuring impact in the
same unit of measure as our goals?
Because if we're doing that, then we're
keeping ourselves honest and we're
saying, "Does this actually have a
chance of contributing?" Whereas, again,
if we get really clever and we come up
with a proprietary scoring system and
all these little intermediate steps, we
can feel like we're doing really awesome
work and being very, very terribly
smart, but we again run the risk that we
are going to lose our connection with
why we're setting about to do this work
in the first place.
>> Such an important and often easily
overlooked point.
idea that when you're doing rice or
whatever version of ice that you do that
impact should be based on impact to your
goal which is one level removed from the
company goal such like it feels so
obvious as you talk about it and I hope
most people know this but I feel like
that's something people forget just like
what is impact oh yeah customers will be
happier again this is not easy work
right working in Prada means that we
have so many different perspectives so
many different folks who have so
different priorities. You know, the
stakeholder management piece of this is
relentless and exhausting and it's
really really easy to lose sight of this
stuff and it takes work and discipline
and and as you said bravery to keep
bringing it back. But I think again it
is not only the right thing to do, but
it it helps you at the end of the day
have a little bit more of a a boundary
between the work you're doing at your
job and the stuff you're good at in your
life.
>> Speaking of boundaries, a lot of the
advice you share will involve people
saying no and pushing back and
convincing people they're wrong, which
is very hard. That's not a natural happy
place for most people.
>> Nope.
>> What advice do you have? What have you
learned works well for pushing back,
helping people see how they're not uh
what they want you to build is wrong?
>> Yeah. So, this is where I have the uh
the benefit, I suppose, of being a
conflict averse people pleaser.
So, I've been uh I've been through this
and I think the thing I am proudest of
saying in product management practice is
that if you're doing product management
really well, you never have to say yes
and you never have to say no. You're
giving people options and you're helping
them understand the trade-offs. So, in
keeping with this idea that there are
things outside of your control, you
know, as a product manager, you're not
always going to be the one who makes the
decision. There are going to be other
people who come to you and say build
this or who say I don't see the value in
that do this do that I want this I want
that you know if those people are in a
position of formal authority in the
organization I've certainly never had
luck telling them no
furthermore I've found myself in
situations where they just know things
that I don't know where they're pursuing
an acquisition so there are certain
things that we have to do or can't do
where you know there's some serious ious
financial challenge that they're working
their way through right now which is
shifting around priorities but they are
not at liberty to discuss that with the
broader organization. It is quite
possible that the folks who are
asking you to do things that don't make
sense have access to information that
you don't. And that in trying to
convince them otherwise, you are not
only going to fail, but you are going to
lose some of that trust and
degrade that relationship that could in
time be really important for you. So I
think the challenge is to say like all
right you want me to build this thing
maybe let's look at the different things
if you're going through these steps if
you say like you know I understand
here's what our team's goals are here's
the stuff we're prioritizing here's the
impact we think it could have if you're
coming to me with something which is
going to have more impact heck yeah I
would love to build that sounds amazing
but if it has an unclear impact or if it
doesn't tie into this then we might need
to adjust the impact we're seeking to
have right if this is suddenly really
important as with that story that was
told in the book, right? Sometimes it's
like, "All right, we got to do this.
Sure, that means that our impact
projection is going to have to be
adjusted this much." You're not saying
no, you're not saying yes. You're
helping someone who is in a position to
make a decision understand the
trade-offs that go into that decision.
And again, if you can do that, you're
going to go home at the end of the day
feeling better. you're going to feel
less like you lost a battle or that you
were, you know, overridden by an unjust
tyrant and it's going to be more like,
okay, I made sure they had all the
information I would want to have if I
were making that decision. That decision
is ultimately theirs to make and I'm
going to do the best I can. Tell me if
you disagree. In my experience, you also
want to recommend a path because a lot
of people don't want PMs just here's all
the options. I have no opinion, no bias
of any kind. you decide. Um, I find it
people want you to have a perspective.
>> Absolutely. Options on a recommendation
is kind of the magic the magic formula.
I did when I was working with Mailchimp,
we actually did a workshop with with all
the product managers at the company
where we had people like roleplay trying
to sell in a single option versus
multiple options with a recommendation.
And it was amazing how when you present
a single option,
people's instinct is just to like, well,
I don't know, like you start poking
holes in it, not because you're a jerk,
but because you're looking at one thing
and you're like, oh, what about this?
What about that? Again, all of your own
anxieties and and fears and the things
that you don't feel represented in there
and where where you're worried, what if
this happens, what if that happens, all
of that kind of detracts from the
momentum. Whereas, if you come in and
say, "Here are three options. Here are
the trade-offs. here's the one we
recommend. Then
every little bit of back and forth makes
those options clearer and stronger. Uh I
feel like people might miss that nuance
in the way we talked about it. So I
think that's a really important point to
make there. Let me come back to the
three steps just for folks that are just
like, "Oh, I'm excited. I'm motivated.
I'm going to change the way we operate."
Uh I'll summarize real quick. So step
one is set team goals close to company
goals. Step two is keep impact first at
every step. Don't forget as you're
building throughout the year. And then
step three is connect every bit of work
back to impact.
>> Yeah.
>> I think again it's important to remind
people this may be hard and annoying and
maybe things are going fine. Everyone's
telling you what to build, you're
building it, shipping it, things are it
seems to be going all right. I think an
important part of this is just like uh
if you believe what you're building is
not helping the business grow and
succeed, either they'll let you go
someday because you're not doing
something that matters or the business
will not work out and you'll be in
trouble. So it's like even if you don't
want to do this something like there's
you need to really seriously think about
this even though it's really hard.
>> Yeah.
>> But maybe let me just think of that a
little bit. Say the business is doing
great. everything's great. CEO is
telling you all the things to build, the
sales guys and girls are just like here
ship these features, everything's great
and everything's working, business is
growing. What thoughts there just like
is it just nah, leave it alone. Or is
your sense, okay, most often this will
not last and you should really start to
work on these skills.
>> You know, it's funny. The teams I've
worked with when things are going well
are sometimes just as anxious as the
teams I've worked with when things are
going poorly because they have a hard
time attributing success to what they're
doing, right? They'll look at it and
they'll say, "Yeah, we're doing great,
but I think that honestly has more to do
with marketing than it does with us."
Or, "Yeah, we're doing great, but we're
just in the right place at the right
time. Our our business is doing really
well. Our sector is doing really well.
We're just growing along with everyone
else who's growing." And I I think as
with most things, if you approach it
with curiosity,
there's a lot to learn from it. So if
you look at it and you say, "Yeah, we
can't necessarily take sole credit for
this, but marketing is doing awesome.
Let's talk to them. What are they doing?
Why is this going so well? What have
they learned from this that we can work
with them more closely?" If your sector
is just doing really well, be like,
"Okay, well, what about this is is
working right now? What might change in
the future? How can we understand this?"
So I think the challenge when things are
going well is to is to keep that
curiosity going and to keep celebrating
the things not just that your team is
doing but that everyone is doing and to
take that time where you have a little
bit more leeway where there's less
pressure on you in the moment to build
those connections with other parts of
the organization to see where that
really good work is happening. Um, you
know, one thing that that makes me sad
is when
teams look upon each other with envy and
disgust, right? When it's like this
team's doing like they're doing great
work, but they're not held to the same
standards that we are and it's not fair
and, you know, they're the team that
everyone likes. It's like
go talk to them because there's probably
something you can learn from them. And
if they're the team that's getting
positive attention, that's doing
meaningful work, there's probably a
reason for that. And if you can
understand that reason and you can align
your work with that team's work, that's
probably going to be really good for
you. So again, I think in a lot of
cases, it comes back down to that
control thing, right? If we can't feel a
sense of control over things are going
well because we did this, we tend to
disconnect ourselves from things going
well and say like, well, I can't like it
almost feels dangerous to engage with it
because what if we didn't do anything
but good things are still happening. And
I think just keeping that openness,
keeping that curiosity going puts you in
a much better position for when things
inevitably begin to either plateau or
decline, which is the cyclical nature of
all things.
Wow. Profound. There. Maybe to start to
wrap up our conversation, what's what's
maybe one question from the book or even
from this conversation that you think
product leaders, product teams should
ask themselves to help them solve
problems that maybe they're not seeing
and to help their team operate better.
>> I mean, I I love the would you fund this
team if you were the CEO question. I
know that that can feel a little
confrontational sometimes. So, a a
gentler way of bringing that up is to
say, "What's one sentence you'd want to
be able to say at the end of this year
that would leave you feeling awesome
about this team's work?" Like, what's
something, you know, at the end of the
year, everything went really well for
this team. You run into the CEO in the
hallway and you say, "I feel awesome
because we did this." And and you'll
sometimes get very different answers
from different people on the team.
Building on those answers, saying like,
"Okay, this is what you care about. This
is what I care about. This is what I'm
worried about. This is what I'm excited
about. That's how you get that magical
people in a room building together or or
musicians in in a room writing their
next song. Right.
>> What a call back at the beginning. I
love
>> getting that conversation out in the
open and getting people to talk about
their perspectives and their
expectations with the goal of bringing
it together to create something better.
>> Bam. Matt, is there anything else that
you wanted to cover or leave listeners
with before we get to our very exciting
lightning round?
>> I think we covered it. I just I just
leave people with again this this hope
that you can start to see the commercial
realities and constraints of your
business as
opportunities, as guideposts, as things
that shape and structure your work, not
as things that you singlehandedly need
to change or break down or transform
because you probably can't. And that's
okay.
>> That's empowering stuff. With that,
we've reached our very exciting
lightning round. Are you ready?
>> Ready as I'm gonna be.
>> Question one, what are two or three
books that you find yourself
recommending most to other people?
>> Radical Focus by Christina Woodka is
obviously like I cite it a lot in my
book. I think it's the best book about
OKRs. I love her style of writing. I I
love the way she tells stories. I love
the focus on focus. this idea that again
the way you do it is less important than
the result of the way of doing it. I
just find that so so inspiring always.
The other book, this is a bit of a
curveball, is by Alan Watts, the the
Buddhist philosopher. It's called the
wisdom of insecurity.
And a lot of the way I talk about
control and giving up control comes from
that book. It also has a concept. It
opens with a concept called the law of
reverse effort which is that sometimes
the harder you try the worse you make
things. And when it comes to setting
goals, doing OKRs, doing strategy, I
think about this a lot that there is a
tendency sometimes to put effort towards
the over complication of things which in
turn makes those things less effective
what they are ultimately intended to
achieve. So highly recommend that book.
It helped me a lot through some dark
times mentally. You there's an idea in
the book he talks about how trying to
keep yourself perpetually safe in an
imagined future is effectively killing
yourself to the present. And oo that hit
hard. That hit me really really really
hard. So,
highly recommend that book. If if the
things we've talked about today make you
even a fraction of as anxious and
fearful as they make me when I navigate
them in my work, then I highly recommend
uh The Wisdom of Insecurity by Alan
Watts.
>> I was going to ask what the title is
because that sounds really powerful. Uh
amazing, amazing pick. Second question,
do you have a favorite recent movie or
TV show you've really enjoyed? God, I so
especially when I'm in kind of worky
writy mode, my brain shuts off to all
things that are not trash. So, I have
been watching a lot of trash. Um, I
watched Temptation Island, the new
season of Temptation Island on Netflix.
I loved it so much. It's
Mark L. Wahberg, who is the host of
Antiques Road Show,
>> just weaponizing therapy speak to
torture people in this bizarre scenario.
And I I should not love it, but
I am only a human and a messy who
lives for the drama sometimes. So, I
know I enjoyed that very much.
>> I think it's the first Temptation Island
call out and I love it. Um,
okay. Favorite product or Yeah. favorite
product you recently discovered that you
really love?
>> Yeah. So, I'm really glad you asked this
question because as a musician, I live
in this world of niche products, which
is so much fun because the economies of
scale for music creators are just
totally different, right? You don't need
to build a product that's going to have
like a billion users and and create a
huge return. Like, you can do something
that like a few hundred or a few
thousand people get a lot of use out of
and love. and you're in this fun realm
of of kind of hybrid physical and
digital and and different types of of
things. And when you asked me this
question, the first thing that came to
mind um was this which is made by an
amplifier builder uh who goes by Milkman
Sound in uh the San Francisco Bay area
who took the uh basically the circuit of
a Fender amplifier and made a version of
it that fits into this handy compact
lightweight form factor. So, for me, as
somebody who is no longer 22 years old
and still occasionally tours with my
friend's band and has back problems, the
fact that I can carry this really
powerful amplifier around in this really
well-designed, aesthetically pleasing
form factor
just feels like such a a joy. It's one
of those products that really
understands what quality means to its
particular audience.
And
I can go on tour and and have things
sound really nice without having to lug
like a giant heavy thing. And I love
that. It's it's something for which I am
I am truly grateful.
>> This makes me want to play music
randomly. Uh, but just so I understand
how this works, do you still plug that
into a speaker or is that
>> Yeah. So, you can have like I have a
little speaker. You can also plug direct
into the soundboard at a at a club or
for recording.
>> Okay. Okay. Got it.
>> So, and it has a little headphone jack,
too. So, if I want to practice in the
hotel room before you play, I can also
use this. It it it does everything you
would need this device to do and nothing
more. And it does it really well. And
that is so delicious to me. Um to have a
product,
>> another great pick
>> that that I'm like, this does exactly
what I need. It does it so well and it
it's uh a delightful product.
>> Two more questions. Do you have a
favorite life motto that you often come
back to find useful in work or in life?
>> I come back to something my mom told me.
I'm I'm sure you've experienced this,
too. When you're a person creating
things in the world, there's a tendency
to look at the numbers and look at like
how am I doing and is did this resonate?
Is this good? Did this work? And I I've
definitely worked on things, you know,
especially in my musical life where
the amount of effort and love and and
time and care that went into something
didn't feel like it showed up in the in
the result of that thing or the way it
was received. And I was talking to my
mom about this once and she said, you
know, I I really believe that no good
work is wasted. Even if you don't see it
right away, when you put good work out
into the world, even if it only finds a
few people, it's never wasted. If you do
work you really believe in, it's going
to have some positive effect on the
world. And
that really stuck with me. And I've
carried that with me even when I think
about
how to write and what to say and when I
start to
worry about outsmarting myself and
should I be more strategic in the way I
message this and should I say something
I don't really totally believe. You
know, there have been a few times, not
recently, but a few times like 10 years
ago where I dabbled in writing
clickbaity headlines because I was like,
"Ooh, is this going to get more
attention?" And and there was one in
particular that got really thoughtful
critique from some people I really
respect. And I was like, I don't want to
do this. Like, I I don't want to
I don't want to put work I don't believe
in out into the world. And even if it
doesn't do what I hoped it would do, I'm
I'm going to go forth with the belief
that no good work is wasted.
>> I totally believe that.
Final question. You wrote a ton of music
reviews over the years. I'm curious if
there's one that was just like very like
people super disagreed with it or just
one that you're super proud of. I mean,
I I I am a villain in certain corners of
the internet for a review I wrote of Liz
Far's self-titled album.
>> I wrote this review when I was 19 when
my worldview was toxic and very much in
progress.
It was a really condescending,
arrogant review written from a place of
unearned condescension and arrogance.
Not that condescension and arrogance
should necessarily be earned. Um, but it
it felt
righteous at the time in a way that is
dangerous, right? that that that toxic
righteousness where you're like, I'm
fighting something bad, but then you
realize that what what you're fighting
is not actually bad. You're actually,
you know, punching sideways and down,
but you don't have the wherewithal and
the maturity to realize that you are not
that you are not where you think you are
in relation to people and culture and
yourself. So, I apologized for that
review in 2019.
and um Liz Fair and I actually had a
really nice little Twitter back and
forth. This was back when Twitter was
still like a place where this kind of
thing could happen. And um it it was it
was nice
to to wrap that up in that way. Um, I
still,
you know, I still don't feel good about
it because it was playing into some
really toxic and hurtful dimensions of
discourse.
But
what can you do if not, you know, look
back on it and and say like, "Yeah, I
was wrong." Like, I was just flat out
wrong. And beyond being wrong, I was
being a jerk. So there will still
periodically be somebody posted this, a
meme creator on Instagram posted that
review like a couple months ago with a
caption like Matt Lameé, you will be
dealt with. And I was like, yeah, yeah.
Like if I read that now, I would
probably
say something pretty similar. So I
think,
as I said, I'm a I'm a a conflict averse
people pleaser.
I I I I I went through my kind of edge
lord phase and uh I don't think it did
any good for me or for anyone else.
>> Wow, that was a much more profound
answer than I expected. Uh I can't
believe people are still referencing
this review from a long time ago. How
many years? Like how?
>> 22. It was 2003, so it was 22 years ago.
It was more than half my life ago. But
this is the wild thing is that on the
internet it still looks new. The first
talk I ever gave uh in London actually
was at a Redmunk event and I brought my
teenage diary with me to make the point
that like if something has you know 10
years of age on it as paper. It it's
contextualized by its own material
existence, right? But somebody will go
like oh I wonder what Pitchfork thought
of this record. They'll see my jerkass
review and be like, "Pitchfork published
this jerkass review. Who was the jerkass
reviewer who wrote it?" And they'll find
me and be like, "Hey, you you're a
jerkass because you wrote this jerkass
review." And I'll be like, "Yes, I I I I
did write that jerkass review from the
place of being a jerkass. But I uh I
like to think I I am uh you know a
person who has lived 22 years of life
since then.
>> Your frontal cortex has developed more
since then. I think it doesn't stop
until 25 26.
>> Matt, this was awesome. We covered so
much ground. We touched on everything I
was hoping to and and more. Two follow
questions. Where can folks find you
online? Talk about the sort of work you
do with companies. And how can listeners
be useful to you? Yeah. So, you can find
me online at mattl.com. Pretty
straightforward. And in terms of how
folks can be useful to me, hopefully I
can be useful to them, whether that's
through the books or through coming in
to work with your company and help your
teams focus. You know, I I I find that
facilitating these conversations is is a
really big value ad. It's hard to have
these conversations to do this without
some outside help sometimes. So again,
whether it's in book form or in me form,
I hope that I can be useful to you and
having these conversations in a way
that's less scary, more accessible, and
leads you down that road to doing
impactful work.
>> Awesome. And mattl.com. And then what's
the name of the book? Where do they find
it?
>> Impact First Product Teams. Um, you can
find it at all the places where you find
books on Amazon. There's an author read
audio book which I recorded right here
in this room with this microphone. I did
all the musical interludes myself.
>> Wow.
>> Because it was a great way to
procrastinate when I did not actually
want to read the book. Uh, but I I I I
hope you will find it fun.
>> Matt, thank you so much for being here.
>> Thanks so much, Lenny. This was great.
>> Bye everyone.
>> Thank you so much for listening. If you
found this valuable, you can subscribe
to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify,
or your favorite podcast app. Also,
please consider giving us a rating or
leaving a review as that really helps
other listeners find the podcast. You
can find all past episodes or learn more
about the show at lennispodcast.com.
See you in the next episode.